DATA AND INFORMATION
DATA
Data are raw facts and figures collected which cannot be used instantly for any decision making until it is processed. Data is also defined as unprocessed information. Examples of data are alphabets, numbers, or symbols.
TYPES OF DATA
Numerical data: These are figures or numbers .Examples are  5, 6 and 10
Alphabetic data: These are letters, names and places. Examples are A-Z, female.Adenike.
Alpha-numeric data: These are combination of alphabets and numbers; Example. Home Address: 8, Babayemi Street, Agege Lagos state.
Audio data: These are voice data.
Graphic data or visual data or video data: These can be pictures, images, diagrams and camera image.
SOURCES OF DATA
Data can be obtained through the following sources:
Interview: Data can be obtained through oral interview
Observation: Data can be obtained through personal observation of things that happen around us.
Document analysis: Data can be obtained through reading and breaking down of various records.
INFORMATION
Information can be defined processed, manipulated and organized data into meaningful and useful form.  Information = Data + process.
For example, in a school, data in form of term examination scores are processed for each student to obtain information in form of first or second term result for individual student
QUALITIES OF GOOD INFORMATION
Relevant :It should be related to the matter in hand
Accurate : It must be correct and free from errors
Comprehensive: It must  complete and easy to understand
Meaningful: It must be expressed in a language that the receiver will understand.
Timely: It must be available at the right time when the users need it.
Reliability: It must be unfailing.
Suitable: It should be right for the purpose or occasion in which it is being made.
CLASSIFICATION OF INFORMATION BASED ON THE FORM IN WHICH THE INFORMATION EXISTS
Written information: This is written down formation such as magazine, newspapers.
Oral information: This is communicated information by talking, speaking.
Visual information: This is communicated through pictures, charts, graphs and video.
Sensory information: This is communicated through the senses such as hearing, feeling, smelling.
CLASSIFICATION OF INFORMATION BASED ON THE TIME OF OCCURRENCE
Continuous information: e.g. inter-house sports competition.
Hourly information: e.g. Radio news.
Daily information : e.g. daily newspaper( Daily time, punch)
Termly information: e.g. student’s card.
Annual information: e.g. company’s annual report or budget.
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN DATA AND INFORMATION
DATA
INFORMATION
Unprocessed raw  facts
Processed data
It has no meaning
It has meaning
It cannot be used for decision making
It can be used for decision making
Data is normally disorganized and disjointed
Information is properly arranged and organized.
Examples are alphabet ,figures or symbol
Examples are statement of account, statement of students’ result.
Data is independent
Information primarily depends on data for it to be complete.